>> Ifill: GOOD EVENING.
I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Woodruff: AND I'M JUDY
WOODRUFF.
ON THE NEWSHOUR TONIGHT: A MAJOR
STEP IN THE THAWING OF RELATIONS
WITCUBAH .
>> Ifill: THE WEEK AAD IHEN
POLITICS AS DONALD TRUMP
DOMINATES THE DEBATE FOR
REPUBLICANS AND DEMOCRATS, AND
CANDIDATE NUMBER 21 PREPARES TO
ENTER THE FRAY.
>> Woodruff: PLUS, IT WAS
ANOTHER WEEKEND OF VIOLENCE IN
CHICAGO.
WHAT CAN BE DONE TO HALT THE
DEADLY MIX OF GUNS ANGANGD S
THAT THREATENS THE CITY'S YOUTH?
>> IT'S SO EASY FOR KIDS HERE TO
GET GUNS, IT'S LIKE COMPARING IT
TO GOING TO THE GAS STATION AND
GETTING A 50-CENT JUICE.
>> Woodruff: GOOD EVENING AND
WELCOME TO OUR NEW HOME FOR THE
PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Ifill: JUDY AND I ARE
SETTLING INTO OUR NEW SET, WITH
FRESH GRAPHICS AND UPDATED
MUSIC, YET WITH THE CLASSIC
SOUND YOU HAVE COME TO RECOGNIZE
AS THE SIGNAL THAT THE NEWSHOUR
IS ON THE AIR.
>> Woodruff: WE THINK THIS NEW
LOOK WILL GIVE US GREATER
FLEXIBILITY AND NEW TOOLS SO
THAT WE CAN BETTER PRESENT THE
SAME QUALITY JOURNALISM AND
ANALYSIS THAT THE NEWSHOUR HAS
BEEN DOING FOR ALMOST 40 YEARS
>> Ifill: AND NOW LET'S GET TO
THE NEWS.
>> Woodruff: THE UNITED NATIONS
SECURITY COUNCIL VOTED
UNANIMOUSLY TODAY TO APPROVE THE
NUCLEAR DEAL NEGOTIATED IN
VIENNA LAST WEEK.
THE VOTE WAS 15 TO ZERO AND IT
SETS THE STAGE FOR THE LIFTING
OF ECONOMIC SANCTIONS, IN
EXCHANGE FOR LIMITS ON TEHRAN'S
NUCLEAR CAPABILITIES.
IN WASHINGTON, PRESIDENT OBAMA
HAILED THE ENDORSEMENT AND
CALLED ON CONGRESS-- WHICH NOW
HAS 60 DAYS TO REVIEW THE DEAL--
TO APPROVE IT.
>> THERE'S BROAD, INTERNATIONAL
CONSENSUS AROUND THIS ISSUE, NOT
JUST AMONG THE INTERNATIONAL
COMMUNITY BUT ALSO AMONG EXPERTS
IN LIBERATION.
MY ASSUMPTION IS CONGRESS WILL
PAY ATTENTION TO THAT
BROAD-BASED CONSENSUS.
>> Woodruff: PRESIDENT OBAMA
MADE THE REMARKS AS HE MET WITH
NIGERIA'S PRESIDENT, MUHAMMADU
BUHARI.
IT'S HIS FIRST WHITE HOUSE VISIT
SINCE HE WAS ELECTED IN MARCH,
IN NIGERIA'S FIRST DEMOCRATIC
TRANSITION OF POWER IN DECADES.
>> Ifill: IN TURKEY, AN
EXPLOSION ROCKED SURUC NEAR THE
BORDER WITH SYRIA, KILLING 31
PEOPLE.
TURKISH OFFICIALS SAID THE
ATTACK APPEARED TO BE A SUICIDE
BOMBING INSPIRED BY THE ISLAMIC
STATE GROUP.
THE MID-DAY EXPLOSION TOOK PLACE
AT A CULTURAL CENTER, AS
A GROUP OF YOUNG POLITICAL
ACTIVISTS WAS WRAPPING UP A NEWS
CONFERENCE.
NEARLY 100 PEOPLE WERE WOUNDED.
>> Woodruff: THE DEATH TOLL FROM
FIERCE FIGHTING IN YEMEN
YESTERDAY HAS NOW RISEN TO
NEARLY 100.
SHIITE REBELS BOMBARDED A TOWN
CLOSE TO THE PORT CITY OF ADEN.
THE HEAD OF AN INTERNATIONAL AID
GROUP SAID SUNDAY'S FIGHTING WAS
THE "WORST DAY" IN THREE MONTHS.
MEANWHILE, SAUDI-LED FIGHTER
JETS KEPT UP THEIR BOMBING
CAMPAIGN AND HIT A POPULAR
MARKET IN THE YEMENI CAPITAL OF
SANAA.
>> Ifill: A NATO AIRSTRIKE ON
TWO AFGHAN MILITARY CHECKPOINTS
KILLED SEVEN AFGHAN TROOPS
TODAY.
AFGHAN OFFICIALS DESCRIBED IT AS
AN ACCIDENT.
TALIBAN FIGHTERS WERE CLASHING
WITH TROOPS NEAR THEIR REMOTE
CHECKPOINTS IN LOGAR PROVINCE AT
THE SAME TIME COALITION
HELICOPTERS FLEW OVERHEAD.
AFGHAN PRESIDENT ASHRAF GHANI
EXPRESSED HIS "PROFOUND SORROW"
OVER THE INCIDENT AND ORDERED AN
INVESTIGATION.
>> Woodruff: THERE WERE MORE
QUESTIONS THAN ANSWERS TODAY IN
THE DEATH OF A YOUNG BLACK WOMAN
IN A TEXAS JAIL LAST WEEK.
CORRESPONDENT WILLIAM BRANGHAM
HAS OUR STORY.
>> WE HAVE CHOSEN THIS SPOT
BECAUSE VERY CLEARLY TO US, THIS
IS A CRIME SCENE!
>> Reporter: RELIGIOUS LEADERS
AND COMMUNITY ACTIVISTS SPOKE
TODAY OUTSIDE THE WALLER COUNTY
JAIL-- THE SAME TEXAS JAIL WHERE
28-YEAR-OLD SANDRA BLAND DIED
UNDER MYSTERIOUS CIRCUMSTANCES A
WEEK AGO.
THE INCIDENT BEGAN ON JULY 10th.
IN THIS VIDEO FILMED ON A
BYSTANDER'S CELLPHONE, BLAND IS
SEEN BEING PINNED TO THE GROUND
BY TWO STATE TROOPERS.
THE TROOPERS SAY BLAND HAD JUST
ASSAULTED AN OFFICER AFTER
THEY'D PULLED HER OVER FOR A
TRAFFIC VIOLATION.
BLAND WAS ARRESTED, AND TAKEN TO
THE COUNTY JAIL.
THREE DAYS LATER SHE WAS FOUND
DEAD IN HER CELL.
THE SHERIFF'S OFFICE SAYS BLAND
COMMITTED SUICIDE BY HANGING
HERSELF WITH A PLASTIC BAG.
OFFICIALS ALSO POINTED TO A
FACEBOOK VIDEO MS. BLAND POSTED
SEVERAL MONTHS AGO SAYING SHE
WAS DEPRESSED.
>> I AM SUFFERING FROM SOMETHING
THAT MANY OF YOU MAY BE
DEALING WITH RIGHT NOW.
IT'S A LITTLE BIT OF DEPRESSION
AS WELL AS P.T.S.D.
>> Reporter: BUT BLAND'S FAMILY
AND OTHERS DON'T BELIEVE IT.
THEY SAY THAT VIDEO WAS MADE
WHEN BLAND WAS UNEMPLOYED, AND
THAT SHE'D JUST STARTED A NEW
JOB AT HER ALMA MATER, PRAIRIE
VIEW A&M UNIVERSITY, AND WAS
VERY EXCITED ABOUT HER
PROSPECTS.
>> THERE WAS NOT A LAZY WOMAN,
THIS WAS NOT AN UNMOTIVATED
WOMAN.
THIS IS A WOMAN WHO HAD DREAMS,
DESIRES AND DRIVES.
>> Reporter: TODAY'S PRESS
CONFERENCE FOLLOWED SEVERAL DAYS
OF VIGILS AND PROTEST MARCHES
FOR BLAND IN HER NATIVE ILLINOIS
AND IN TEXAS.
>> Woodruff: LOCAL PROSECUTORS
HAVE PROMISED A FULL
INVESTIGATION INTO BLAND'S
DEATH.
TODAY, THEY POINTED TO
SURVEILLANCE VIDEO FROM INSIDE
THE JAIL THAT SHOWS NO ONE
ENTERED OR EXITED HER CELL
AROUND THE TIME SHE IS BELIEVED
TO HAVE DIED.
>> Ifill: GREEKS LINED UP
OUTSIDE BANKS TODAY TO WITHDRAW
MONEY FOR THE FIRST TIME IN MORE
THAN THREE WEEKS.
A STEADY STREAM OF CUSTOMERS
MADE THEIR WAY TO A.T.M'S AND
BANKS, BUT THERE WERE STRICT
LIMITS ON HOW MUCH CASH THEY
COULD TAKE OUT.
AND SHOPKEEPERS CHANGED THE
PRICES ON THEIR GOODS TO REFLECT
THE HIGHER TAXES THEY'RE
CHARGING UNDER THE TERMS OF AN
E.U. RESCUE DEAL.
>> Woodruff: THE PRICE OF GOLD
CONTINUED ITS SLIDE TODAY--
HITTING A FIVE-YEAR LOW.
THE DROP WAS HELPED ALONG BY THE
DOLLAR'S GAIN AND A LOOMING
INTEREST RATE HIKE.
ON WALL STREET TODAY, STOCKS
WERE RELATIVELY STAGNANT.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
GAINED 13 POINTS TO CLOSE AT
18,100.
THE NASDAQ ADDED EIGHT POINTS
AND THE S&P 500 GAINED MORE THAN
A POINT.
>> Ifill: STILL TO COME ON THE
NEWSHOUR: RESTORING DIPLOMATIC
TIES WITH CUBA, AFTER MORE THAN
50 YEARS, THE WEEK AHEAD IN
POLITICS WITH STU ROTHENBERG AND
SUSAN PAGE, ILLEGAL GUNS, GANGS
AND SUMMER VIOLENCE ON THE
STREETS OF CHICAGO AND MUCH
MORE.
>> Woodruff: THE UNITED STATES
AND CUBA OFFICIALLY NORMALIZED
DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS TODAY AND
THE CUBAN EMBASSY IN WASHINGTON-
-CLOSED SINCE 1961-- RE-OPENED
THIS MORNING.
THE NEWSHOUR'S P.J. TOBIA HAS
THIS REPORT.
>> Reporter: WITH A CEREMONIAL
FLOURISH, THE CUBAN FLAG WAS
RAISED ABOVE THE EMBASSY IN
WASHINGTON THIS MORNING-- A
SIGHT NOT SEEN IN OVER FIVE
DECADES.
AS THE MISSION OFFICIALLY
OPENED, SO DID A NEW POST-COLD
WAR CHAPTER IN U.S.-CUBA
RELATIONS.
BUT DEEP DIFFERENCES BETWEEN THE
TWO COUNTRIES REMAIN, AS WAS
EVIDENT WHEN FOREIGN MINISTER
BRUNO RODRIGUEZ SPOKE INSIDE THE
EMBASSY.
EMBASSY. >> (translated
): THE HISTORIC
>> (translated): THE
HISTORIC EVENTS WE ARE LIVING
TODAY WILL
EVENTS WE ARE LIVING TODAY WILL
ONLY MAKE SENSE WITH THE REMOVAL
OF THE BLOCKADE, AND THE RETURN
OF OCCUPIED TERRITORY IN
GUANTANAMO.
>> Reporter: THE U.S. AND CUBA
SEVERED DIPLOMATIC TIES IN 1961,
WHEN CUBAN PRESIDENT FIDEL
CASTRO REFERRED TO THE AMERICAN
EMBASSY AS A "NEST OF SPIES."
NOW AFTER MORE THAN TWO YEARS OF
NEGOTIATIONS, RELATIONS ARE
SLOWLY THAWING.
BUT STICKING POINTS REMAIN,
CHIEF AMONG THEM: HAVANA'S
DEMAND FOR AN END TO A CRIPPLING
TRADE EMBARGO AND U.S. CALLS FOR
DEMOCRACY AND HUMAN RIGHTS IN
CUBA.
REACTION WAS MIXED ON THE
STREETS OUTSIDE THE CUBAN
EMBASSY.
AS PROTESTERS FROM CUBA AND
AROUND LATIN AMERICA GATHERED.
>> I SUPPORT THE CUBAN PEOPLE,
DEFINITELY.
>> Reporter: ROSA MARIA PAYA'S
FATHER WAS A CUBAN OPPOSITION
LEADER WHO DIED IN CUBA UNDER
MYSTERIOUS CIRCUMSTANCES IN
2012.
SHE URGED THE U.S. TO SEIZE THIS
OPPORTUNITY TO HELP IMPROVE
CUBA'S HUMAN RIGHTS RECORD.
>> SO FAR WE HAVE SEEN VERY
CONCRETE AND SPECIFIC STEPS FROM
THE PART OF THE AMERICAN
ADMINISTRATION IN ORDER TO
BUT NOT SUPPORT-- AND SPECIFIC
AND CONCRETE SUPPORT-- TO THE
DEMANDS OF THE CUBAN CITIZENS,
TO THE DEMANDS OF CHANGE FOR
HUMAN RIGHTS TO THE DEMANDS OF
>> Reporter: SECRETARY OF STATE
JOHN KERRY MET WITH HIS CUBAN
COUNTERPART THIS AFTERNOON AT
THE STATE DEPARTMENT.
CUBA'S FLAG NOW HANGS IN THE
BUILDING'S LOBBY WHERE IT WAS
INSTALLED IN THE PRE-DAWN HOURS
WITHOUT FANFARE.
>> WE ARE TAKING A HISTORIC AND
LONG OVERDUE STEP IN THE RIGHT
DIRECTION.
TO KEEP MOVING FORWARD BOTH
HILL, THERE REMAINS SIGNIFICANT
OF CIGS TO THE MOVE.
>> I LOOK FORWARD TO WORKING
WITH MY COLLEAGUES IN CONGRESS
TO TRY TO BLOCK THE EXPANSION OF
THE U.S. EMBASSY IN CUBA, TO TRY
TO STOP THE CONFIRMATION OF THE
U.S. AMBASSADOR TO THE ISLAND.
>> Reporter: MEANWHILE, IN
CUBA, IN U.S. EMBASSY REOPENED
FOR BUSINESS IN HAVANA.
CUBANS LINED UP FOR VISAS TO
TRAVEL TO THE U.S. WELCOMED THE
OCCASION.
>> Reporter: THE POMP AND
CIRCUMSTANCE WILL WAIT UNTIL
MID-AUGUST WHEN KERRY MAKES HIS
HISTORIC VISIT TO FORMALLY RAISE
THE AMERICAN FLAG.
I'M P.J. TOBIA FOR THE PBS
NEWSHOUR IN WASHINGTON.
>> Woodruff: FOR MORE ON THE
RESUMPTION OF RELATIONS BETWEEN
THE U.S. AND CUBA, WE TURN TO
MARIA DE LOS ANGELES TORRES.
SHE'S A CUBAN-BORN AMERICAN AND
A PROFESSOR AT THE UNIVERSITY OF
ILLINOIS, CHICAGO, WHERE SHE IS
ALSO EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF THE
SCHOOL'S PROGRAM ON LATINO
RESEARCH.
MS. TORRES, THANK YOU VERY MUCH
FOR JOINING US.
FIRST OF ALL, HOW WOULD YOU
DESCRIBE THIS NEW RELATIONSHIP?
HOW IS IT GOING TO BE DIFFERENT
FROM DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS THE
U.S. HAS WITH OTHER COUNTRIES?
>> WITH WELL, I THINK, FIRST OF
ALL, THERE'S 50 YEARS OF
HOSTILITY, AND I THINK THAT IT'S
ALMOST LIKE THE DAY AFTER THE
STORM.
RIGHT NOW, WE HAVE TO SEE HOW
MANY TREES HAVE FALLEN DOWN AND
WHAT WE'RE GOING TO DO WITH
THAT.
I THINK, ALSO, BECAUSE OF THE
INTIMATE RELATIONSHIP THAT THE
UNITED STATES HAS HAD WITH CUBA,
THE FACT THAT THERE ARE MANY
CUBANS LIVING IN THE UNITED
STATES, THE FACT THERE ARE MANY
OTHER CUBANS WHO WOULD LIKE TO
COME TO THE UNITED STATES, I
THINK THERE WILL BE A UNIQUE SET
OF CHALLENGES.
THE REGIME HAS NOT CHANGED.
I DON'T THINK THIS POLICY WILL
CHANGE THE REGIME.
IT WILL, HOWEVER, HELP IN WHAT
COULD BE A PEACEFUL TRANSITION.
>> Woodruff: WHAT SORT OF
RESTRICTIONS ARE STILL GOING TO
BE THERE FOR AMERICANS WHO WANT
TO TRAVEL TO CUBA?
WHERE DO YOU SEE THAT HEADED?
>> WELL, PART OF THIS IS
CODIFIED IN LAW TO CONGRESS.
I DO NOT SEE THAT CONGRESS IS
WILLING, AT THIS MOMENT OR ANY
TIME AT LEAST IN THE IMMEDIATE
FUTURE, TO CHANGE THE POLICY OF
THE EMBARGO.
HOWEVER, I THINK THAT THIS IS
GOING TO ALLOW A MORE POROUS, IF
YOU WILL, EMBARGO.
WE'VE ALREADY SEEN THAT HAPPEN
IN.
THE LAST SIX MONTHS, WE'VE SEEN
AN UPTICK IN TRAVEL TO CUBA,
RESTRICTIONS ON HOW MUCH MONEY
COULD BE SENT TO RELATIVES HAS
ACTUALLY BEEN EXPANDED, SO
THERE'S MORE MONEY GOING INTO
CUBA.
A LOT OF THE SMALL BUSINESSES
ARE ACTUALLY FUELED BY FAMILY
MEMBERS HERE IN THE UNITED
STATES, AND I THINK THAT WE WILL
SEE INCREASED IN THE NEXT FEW
MONTHS.
>> Woodruff: SO YOU SEE
COMMERCE INCREASING BETWEEN THE
TWO COUNTRIES?
>> WELL, WE ALREADY HAVE CUBA --
THE UNITED STATES IS THE LARGEST
IMPORTER OF GOODS TO CUBA TODAY.
THEIR AGRICULTURE AND
PHARMACEUTICAL.
THIS ACTUALLY HAPPENED UNDER THE
BUSH ADMINISTRATION.
AS FAR AS OTHER KINDS OF
ACTIVITY, THEY ARE STILL GOING
TO BE UNDER THE RESTRICTION OF
THE EMBARGO, WHICH IS
CONGRESSIONAL, BUT THERE WILL BE
OTHER KINDS OF, I THINK, SMALLER
KINDS OF BUSINESSES THAT ARE
BEING ALLOWED UNDER EXECUTIVE
ORDER AND UNDER THE POWER OF THE
PRESIDENT.
MOST OF THESE ARE COMING FROM
FAMILY MEMBERS.
THAT IS WHY WE ARE SEEING ALL
SORTS OF LITTLE BUSINESSES POP
UP AND PEOPLE SUPPORTING THE
FAMILY.
>> Woodruff: WHAT IS GOING TO
HAPPEN TO THE HOMES, TO THE
PROPERTY LEFT BEHIND MANY YEARS
AGO BY CUBAN AMERICANS WHO FLED
THAT COUNTRY, WHO CAME HERE, WHO
ARE LIVING IN THE UNITED STATES
BUT LEFT A LOT BEHIND THERE?
>> WELL, I THINK ALL THESE
ISSUES ARE NEGOTIABLE, RIGHT?
AND WHAT WE'VE NOT HAD IN THE
PAST IS A MEANS THROUGH WHICH TO
NEGOTIATE.
I THINK THE REESTABLISHMENT OF
DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS OPENS UP
THOSE CHANNELS.
WHETHER OR NOT THESE ARE THINGS
THAT WILL BE PUT ON THE TABLE I
THINK IS TOO EARLY TO TELL.
I'D LIKE TO SAY I HAVE BEEN BACK
TO THE HOME I WAS RAISED IN
UNTIL SIX YEARS OF AGE AND THE
LADY WHO'S LIVING IN THE HOME
HAS TRIED TO SELL ME THAT HOME
SEVERAL TIMES OVER.
ACTUALLY, RATHER CHEAPLY.
I WOULD NOT WANT TO BUY THAT
HOME.
SO I THINK IT'S GOING TO BE
INTERESTING, BUT WHAT WE DO HAVE
NOW IS THAT CHANNEL THROUGH
WHICH WE CAN PUT THESE ISSUES ON
THE TABLE AND NEGOTIATE THEM AND
HOPEFULLY MOVE FORWARD IN WHAT
WE DO WITH OUR ENEMIES AND OUR
FRIENDS.
>> Woodruff: MARIA DE LOS
ANGELES TORRES AT THE UNIVERSITY
OF ILLINOIS, CHICAGO, WE THANK
YOU.
>> THANK YOU, JUDY.
>> Ifill: FOR MOST DEMOCRATS AND
REPUBLICANS, 2016 HAS TURNED
INTO A SEASON OF DISRUPTION AS
CANDIDATES HAVE ATTEMPTED TO WOO
VOTERS FROM THE LEFT AND THE
RIGHT AND ENCOUNTERED ATTACKS
FROM WITHIN.
HERE TO SORT IT OUT THIS
POLITICS MONDAY: SUSAN PAGE,
WASHINGTON BUREAU CHIEF FOR
"U.S.A. TODAY" AND STU
ROTHENBERG OF THE ROTHENBERG AND
GONZALES POLITICAL REPORT.
AND THE ROLL CALL NEWSPAPER.
PART OF THE DISRUPTION FOR THE
LAST SEVERAL WEEKS HAS BEEN
DONALD TRUMP.
THIS WEEK HE WAS AT A FAITH AND
VALUES SUMMIT IN IOWA AND ASKED
ABOUT JOHN McCAIN WHO SAID
THAT DONALD TRUMP WAS STIRRING
UP THE CRAZIES, SO DONALD TRUMP
RESPONDED.
>> I SUPPORTED HIM.
I SUPPORTED HIM FOR PRESIDENT.
I RAISED A MILLION DOLLARS FOR
HIM.
IT'S A LOT OF MONEY.
I SUPPORTED HIM.
HE LOST.
SO I NEVER LIKED HIM AS MUCH
AFTER THAT BECAUSE I DON'T LIKE
LOSERS, BUT --
>> HE'S A WAR HERO.
BECAUSE HE
WAS CAPTURED.
I LIKE PEOPLE WHO WEREN'T
CAPTURED.
>> Ifill: SO WHAT EFFECT DO WE
THINK THAT DONALD TRUMP'S
STATEMENTS THIS WEEKEND NOT ONLY
ON THAT BUT ALSO RELIGION HAD TO
DO WITH THIS RACE?
>> IT'S INTERESTING BECAUSE WHEN
DONALD TRUMP MADE OUTRAGEOUS
STATEMENTS ABOUT MEXICAN
IMMIGRANTS SAYING THEY WERE
RAPISTS AND DRUG DEALERS, THERE
WERE PSHBACKS AMONG THE RIVALS.
ON THIS, HE'S BEEN CALLED TO
APOLOGIZE WHICH HE REFUSED TO
DO.
THE QUESTION IS WILL THIS
REINFORCE DONALD TRUMP
SUPPORTERS WHO LIKE THE FACT
HE'S A NO SURRENDER TYPE OF GUY
OR WILL THIS MEAN HIS PHENOMENAL
RISE WILL BE REVERSED?
>> Ifill: WHAT DO YOU THINK,
STU?
>> IT'S TOO EARLY THE TO KNOW.
THE INDICATION OF THE PAST TWO
WEEKS IS HE'S BEEN IN FIRST OR
SECOND PLACE EITHER IN NATIONAL
POLLS OR IOWA.
HE'S CLEARLY TOUCHED A NERVE.
I'M SKEPTICAL IT'S GOING TO LAST
MUCH LONGER, BUT THE REPUBLICAN
ELECTORATE, THE CORE REPUBLICAN
VOTER IS ANGRY, FRUSTRATED,
DISAPPOINTED NOT ONLY AT THE
PRESIDENT BUT AT LEADERSHIP
WITHIN THEIR OWN PARTY, AND
DONALD TRUMP GOES OUT THERE AND
HE'S BOM BOMBASTIC, EXPLOSIVE,
CAUSES TROUBLE, AND IT HAS
RESONATED.
OVER THE LONG HAUL, IT'S HARD TO
BELIEVE DONALD TRUMP WILL BE
REPUBLICAN NOMINEE FOR
PRESIDENT, BUT IN THE SHORT TERM
HE'S OBVIOUSLY A FACTOR IN THE
DEBATE AND DISCUSSIONS.
>> Ifill: WHAT STRUCK ME IS HE
VOTED THE GUY MOST REPUBLICANS
VOTED FOR IN 2008, BUT HE ALSO
DID ANOTHER INTERESTING THING IN
THAT HE KIND OF INSULTED
EVANGELICALS A LITTLE BIT, EVEN
THOUGH HE WAS AT A EVANGELICAL
CONFERENCE.
HE SAID HE'S A PRESBYTERIAN, HE
TAKES THE LITTLE CRACKER BUT
HE'S NEVER ASKED GOD FOR
FORGIVENESS, WHICH SEEMS THAT
HURT.
>> HIM SAYING H WAFER IN A
DISMISSIVE WAY AND THAT HE
DIDN'T ASK FORGIVENESS, THAT'S
SHORTCOMINGS.
BUT HIS PART OF THE REPUBLICAN
PARTY IS A TEA PARTY WHICH
THINKS WASHINGTON DOESN'T WORK,
POLITICIANS CAN'T THE BE
TRUSTED, HERE'S A GUY WHO TELLS
HARD TRUTHS.
WE DON'T PUNCH TOO MUCH STORY IN
A SINGLE POLL BUT A
WASHINGTON, D.C. POLL OUT
TONIGHT SAYS DONALD TRUMP IN
FIRST PLACE 24%.
BUT SAID THE POLLING SUNDAY
NIGHT WHEN PEOPLE POSSIBLY HEARD
ABOUT THE McCAIN EXCHANGE, HIS
SUPPORT FELL TO SINGLE DIGITS.
THAT MAY BE ONE EARLY SIGN THIS
WILL HURT HIM.
>> LET'S REMEMBER THAT RIGHT NOW
WHEN PEOPLE ANSWER POLL
QUESTIONS, THEY'RE NOT REALLY
ANSWERING THE QUESTION OF WHO DO
YOU WANT TO BE PRESIDENT OF THE
UNITED STATES.
THEY'RE ANSWERING A DIFFERENT
QUSTION.
WHO IS REFLECTING YOUR ANGER AND
FRUSTRATIONS AND
DISAPPOINTMENTS?
WHO IS GIVING VOICE TO YOUR
FEELINGS?
>> Ifill: OKAY, SO THAT'S THE
ANSWER TO YOUR QUESTION FOR NOW.
THERE ARE 20 OTHER PEOPLE IN THE
RACE, AND THEY ALL HAVE TO
RESPOND EVERY SINGLE DAY TO THE
DONALD TRUMP WHIRLWIND.
SO WHAT DOES IT TELL US ABOUT
THAT?
>> I THINK THE GREATEST ONE IS
IT'S KIND OF FROZEN THE RACE.
NOBODY ELSE CAN GET MUCH
TRACTION.
HOW DO YOU GET THROUGH WHEN
DONALD TRUMP IS SAYING DONALD
TRUMP-ISMS, WHATEVER THEY ARE.
INDIVIDUAL CANDIDATES I THINK
ARE HURT BECAUSE OF HIS APPEAL
TO THE TEA PARTY AND ANGRY OLD
VOTERS IS EATING INTO TED
CRUZ'S.
HIS EMPHASIS ON A
STRAIGHT-TALKING, REPUBLICAN,
I'LL TELL YOU WHAT'S REALLY
GOING ON EATS INTO CHRIS
CHRISTIE'S.
SO MORE THAN ANYTHING ELSE, HE
HAS BEEN, AS YOU SAID, A
DISRUPTER.
>> AND AN OPPORTUNITY COST,
RIGHT?
OTHER CANDIDATES NOT ONLY CAN'T
GET ANY ATTENTION, THEY CAN'T
TALK ABOUT ISSUES INCLUDING
ISSUES THAT ARE LIKELY TO BE
MUCH MORE IMPORTANT IN THE
PRESIDENTIAL CAMPAIGN.
>> Ifill: WHAT DOES IT DO FOR
CANDIDATES LIKE SCOTT WALKER,
THE GOVERNOR OF WISCONSIN, GOT
INTO THE RACE LAST WEEK, JOHN
KASICH THE GOVERNOR OF OHIO GETS
INTO THE RACE THIS WEEK AND WHO
WE ASSUME WOULD BE STRONG
MIDWESTERN GOVERNORS, DO THEY
GET BLOWN OUT OF THE WATER WITH
ALL THIS GOING ON?
>> I THINK IT COST SCOTT WALKER
SOME HE EXPECTED TO GET FROM THE
ANNOUNCEMENT.
IF GOVERNOR KASICH ANNOUNCES
TOMORROW, DOES TH THE ATTENTIONF
TRUMP COST HIM?
FOR JOHN KASICH, THAT COULD BE
IMPORTANT BECAUSE YOU'RE COMING
UP ON THE FIRST DEBATE NEXT
MONTH, NEED TO BE IN THE TOP TEN
TO PARTICIPATE.
KASICH IS EXPECTING A PUMP --
BUMP IN TOMORROW'S ANNOUNCEMENT
TO GET HIM AT NUMBER 9 OR 10 TO
PARTICIPATE IN THE DEBATE.
>> Ifill: THE DEMOCRATS, THE
NET ROOTS NATION CONFERENCE,
WHERE THE LIBERAL CANDIDATES
SHOW UP AND THEY TELL THEM WHAT
THEY WANT TO HEAR.
BUT BOTH BERNIE SANDERS AND
MARTIN O'MALLEY GOT SHOUTED DOWN
BY PEOPLE WHO WERE THERE ON
BEHALF OF THE BLACK LIVES MATTER
MOVEMENT AND NONE CAME OUT
SMELLING LIKE A ROSE.
>> I THINK THAT TOLD LESS ABOUT
THE CANDIDATES AND MORE ABOUT
THE CONSTITUENTS THERE.
THIS IS THE TEA PARTY VERSION ON
THE DEMOCRATIC, ON THE
PROGRESSIVE SIDE, PEOPLE WHO ARE
DISTRUSTFUL OF THE DEMOCRATIC
PARTY'S LEADERSHIP, WANT MORE
IDEOLOGY, MORE CONFRONTATION.
RIGHT NOW, THE DEMOCRATS DON'T
QUITE HAVE THE PROBLEM THE
REPUBLICANS HAVE WITH THE TEA
PARTY AND THE DIVISION, BUT THIS
CONFERENCE WAS, I THINK, A
WARNING THAT THE DEMOCRATS HAVE
TO WORRY ABOUT THAT KIND OF
DISRUPTION.
>> Ifill: IS THIS THE KIND OF
THING HILLARY CLINTON HAS TO
WORRY ABOUT?
>> YEAH, I THINK IT IS.
WE DON'T THINK MARTIN O'MALLEY
OR BERNIE SANDERS WILL BE THE
NOMINEE, WE THINK HILLARY
CLINTON WILL BE THE DEMOCRATIC
NOMINEE AND SHE WILL HAVE TO
DEAL WITH THE PARTY THAT MOVED
SIGNIFICANTLY TO THE LEFT SINCE
HER HUSBAND RAN FOR PRESIDENT
AND THAT IS DISTRESSFUL FOR HER
EVEN THOUGH HER SUPPORT REMAINS
STRONG AMONG LIBERALS.
SHE WILL HAVE TO DEAL WITH A
LIBERAL PARTY WHO FEELS
ENERGIZED.
>> Ifill: AND DEALING WITH
ENERGIES FAR LEFT, FAR RIGHT.
FUN SUMMER.
SUSAN PAGE, U.S.A. TODAY, STU
ROTHENBERG, ROTHENBERG AND
GONZALES POLITICAL REPORT, THANK
YOU.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: IN CHICAGO THIS
SUMMER, POLICE ARE DEALING WITH
AN UNSETTLING SPIKE IN VIOLENT
CRIME, AFTER A DROP IN THE
HOMICIDE RATE OVER THE LAST TWO
YEARS.
THIS WEEKEND, 11 DEAD AND 34
INJURED.
MORE NOW FROM SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT CHRIS BURY.
>> Reporter: IN CHICAGO, THIS IS
THE SEASON OF SORROW AND GRIEF.
EVERY SUMMER, TEARS FLOW AS THE
BODY COUNT CLIMBS WITH THE
TEMPERATURES.
THIS IS THE KILLING SEASON.
MANY OF THOSE KILLED ARE KIDS
FILLED WITH PROMISE, INCLUDING
VONZELL BANKS, JUST 17.
FOR HIS FAMILY, THE PAIN IS
UNBEARABLE.
BUT SO MANY UNG YOPEOPLE LIKE
HIM ARE DYING THAT THWHOLE E
CITY IS GRIEVING, TOO.
>> DO YOU THINK IT'S TOO MUCH
FOR A CITY TO LET ITS PARENTS
SEE THEIR KIDS GRADUATE?
>> Reporter: EVEN CHICAGO'S
HARD-CHARGING MAYOR, RAHM
EMANUEL, HAD TO CHOKE BACK HIS
TEARS.
>> I WILL TELL YOU THIS AS A
FATHER OF THREE.
THIS IS NOT NATURAL.
THIS IS NOT RIGHT.
THEY DESERVE BETTER.
>> Reporter: BY ALL ACCOUNTS,
VONZELL BANKS DESERVED BETTER,
TOO.
PLAYING BY THE RULES, STAYING
OUT OF TROUBLE, SPENDING TIME AT
CHURCH.
THEY LLEDCA HIM "DRUMMER BOY"
FOR HIS TALENT KEEPING THE BEAT
FOR THE CHOIR.
FOR HIS PASTOR, DERAIL SMITH,
THE PAIN IS PERSONAL.
HE WATCHED VONZELL GROW UP.
>> HE WAS BROUGHT UP IN A
TRADITIONAL TYPE FAMILY WHERE IT
WAS "YES, SIR, YES MA'AM, AND
THANK YOU VERY MUCH, AND I
APPRECIATE YOU," THOSE TYPE OF
THINGS.
THERE WAS NEVER ANY INDICATION
FOR ME TO SEE THAT HE HAD ANY
TYPE OF INTERACTION WITH DRUGS
OR WITH ANY TYPE OF VIOLENCE.
HE WAS NOT THAT, NO.
NOT AT ALL.
>> Reporter: SO A GOOD KID.
>> ABSOLUTELY.
ABSOLUTELY.
>> Reporter: THAT PROMISING LIFE
ENDED DURING A FAMILY OUTING
OVER THE JULY 4TH WEEKEND AT
THIS PLAYGROUND, A GRITTY SLAB
OF ASPHALT ON THE CITY'S
SOUTH SIDE.
IN A BITTER IRONY, IT HAD
RECENTLY BEEN RE-NAMED FOR
HADIYA PENDLETON, THE 15-YEAR-
OLD HONOR STUDENT WHOSE KILLING
DREW NATIONAL ATTENTION WHEN SHE
WAS SHOT TO DEATH IN ANOTHER
PARK JUST DAYS AFTER PERFORMING
AT PRESIDENT OBAMA'S SECOND
INAUGURATION.
HER PARENTS WERE BEYOND DISMAY
TO LEARN OF VONZELL'S KILLING
HERE.
>> I WAS DEVASTATED.
THE PARK, YOU KNOW, WE JUST GOT
THE PARK RENAMED, AND ALREADY,
YOU KNOW, THERE WAS A MURDER
HERE.
>> MY EMOTIONS REALLY GOT THE
BEST OF ME TO BE PEECTLRFY
HONEST, BECAUSE THE SITUATIONS
WERE SO SIMILAR BETWEEN WHAT
HAPPENED TO MY DAUGHTER, AND
WHAT HAPPENED TO THEIR SON.
>> Reporter: LIKE HADIYA
PENDLETON-- AND SO MANY OTHERS
IN CHICAGO-- VONZELL BANKS DIED
FROM A BULLET INTENDED FOR
SOMEONE ELSE.
IN THIS CASE, A GANG MEMBER WHO
RAN ONTO THIS BASKETBALL COURT
FLEEING A RIVAL.
POLICE SAY THE GANG-BANGER
PULLED OUT A GUN AND FIRED
INDISCRIMINATELY, HITTING BANKS
IN THE BACK.
HIS COUSIN, ALSO SHOT, SURVIVED.
>> VONZELL DIED IN HIS FATHER'S
ARMS.
A FATHER NOT ONLY LOST HIS SON,
HE HELD HIM AS HE TOOK HIS LAST
BREATH.
>> SHOTS FIRED.
>> Reporter: ALREADY THIS YEAR,
CHICAGO HAS SEEN MORE THAN 2,000
SHOOTINGS.
THE NUMBER OF MURDERS, MORE THAN
200, CLIMBING AGAIN AFTER
DROPPING EACH OF THE LAST TWO
YEARS.
SUMMER NIGHTS ARE THE WORST.
>> IT'S DEFINITELY RELATED TO
HEAT, THERE'S DEFINITELY MORE
SHOOTINGS WHEN IT GETS WARM OUT,
THAT'S JUST THE WAY IT GOES.
>> Reporter: WE SPENT A RECENT
FRIDAY NIGHT WITH PAULEY
LAPOINTE, A "NIGHTCRAWLER" WHO
RACES TO CRIME SCENES TO SHOOT
FOOTAGE FOR LOCAL T.V. STATIONS.
JUST AFTER 11, POLICE RADIOS
CRACKLED WITH REPORTS OF THE
FIRST OF TEN SHOOTINGS THAT
NIGHT.
WHAT HAVE YOU HEARD SO FAR FROM
THE SCANNER?
WHAT DO YOU KNOW?
>> SO FAR WE GOT A PERSON SHOT,
SOUNDS LIKE A VICTIM IN THEIR
20S, CRITICAL CONDITION,
AMBULANCE EN ROUTE.
>> Reporter: WHEN WE ARRIVE, A
YOUNG WOMAN IS CLEARLY
DISTRAUGHT.
25-YEAR-OLD KEITH CANNON HAS
BEEN SHOT IN THE CHEST.
HE DIED A FEW HOURS LATER, ONE
OF THREE MEN KILLED THAT NIGHT.
EVEN AS POLICE INVESTIGATED THAT
SHOOTING, ANOTHER ERUPTED A FEW
BLOCKS AWAY.
>> SHOTS FIRED, 7908 HALSTED.
7908 HALSTED.
FIVE SHOTS WERE FIRED AT THE
DOOR OF THE RESTAURANT.
>> Reporter: MORE SHOOTINGS.
>> YUP.
HERE THEY COME.
>> Reporter: THIS TIME, TWO MEN
HAVE BEEN SHOT OUTSIDE THIS FAST
FOOD JOINT, THE GUN CASINGS
STILL IN CLEAR VIEW.
BY THE END OF THE WEEKEND, 32
PEOPLE HAD BEEN SHOT.
SIX OF THEM DIED.
HOW FRUSTRATING IS IT FOR YOU TO
SEE THE LEVEL OF VIOLENCE THAT
CHICAGO IS EXPERIENCING THIS
SUMMER?
>> WELL, IT'S VERY FRUSTRATING
BECAUSE I SEE CLEARLY WHAT NEEDS
TO BE DONE.
>> Reporter: POLICE
SUPERINTENDENT GARRY McCARTHY
SAYS COPING WITH CHICAGO'S
VIOLENCE IS LIKE DRINKING FROM A
FIRE HOSE.
HIS OFFICERS TAKE MORE ILLEGAL
GUNS OFF THE STREET THAN NEW
YORK AND L.A. COMBINED: MORE
THAN 3,400 IN THE FIRST SIX
MONTHS OF THIS YEAR.
BUT EVEN THAT HAS NOT BEEN
ENOUGH TO STEM THE KILLINGS.
>> THE BIGGEST REASON IS, THE
PEOPLE WHO WE ARREST WITH
FIREARMS DO NOT DO JAIL TIME
HERE IN THE STATE OF ILLINOIS.
POSSESSION OF A LOADED FIREARM,
ILLEGALLY, IN THE STATE OF
ILLINOIS IS NOT EVEN CONSIDERED
A VIOLENT CRIME FOR SENTENCING
PURPOSES.
AND IT'S VERY FRUSTRATING TO
KNOW THAT IT'S LIKE 7% OF THE
POPULATION CAUSES 80% OF THE
VIOLENT CRIME.
WELL, LET'S PUT THAT 7% OF THE
POPULATION IN JAIL.
SOMEBODY HAS TO GO TO JAIL.
>> Reporter: McCARTHY ALSO
BLAMES A CHICAGO GANG CULTURE
THAT IS EVEN MORE ENTRENCHED--
AND DEADLY-- THAN THE ONES HE
KNEW DURING PREVIOUS STINTS IN
NEW YORK CITY AND NEWARK.
>> GANGS HERE ARE-- THEY'RE
TRADITIONAL GANGS THAT ARE
GENERATIONAL, IF YOU WILL.
THE GRANDFATHER WAS A GANG
MEMBER, FATHER'S A GANG MEMBER,
AND THE KID RIGHT NOW IS GOING
TO BE A GANG MEMBER.
>> Reporter: HOW EASY IS IT FOR
THESE KIDS, 12, 13 YEARS OLD, TO
GET GUNS?
>> IT'S SO EASY FOR KIDS HERE TO
GET GUNS, IT'S LIKE COMPARING IT
TO GOING TO THE GAS STATION AND
GETTING A 50-CENT JUICE.
>> Reporter: FOR 12 YEARS, DIANE
LATIKER HAS RUN AN AFTER SCHOOL
PROGRAM CALLED "KIDS OFF THE
BLOCK" IN ONE OF CHICAGO'S
DEADLIEST NEIGHBORHOODS.
IN 2007, SHE BUILT A MEMORIAL
WITH BRICKS CONTAINING THE NAMES
OF CHILDREN AND TEENS KILLED IN
CHICAGO VIOLENCE.
AFTER 374 BRICKS, SHE HAD TO
STOP.
THERE WAS NO MORE ROOM.
NEARLY 600 MORE YOUNG PEOPLE
HAVE DIED VIOLENTLY SINCE THEN.
>> IF WE WOULD HAVE KEPT WITH
THE BRICKS, IT WOULD HAVE TOOK
OVER THE WHOLE BLOCK, SADLY,
SADLY.
>> Reporter: DIANE LATIKER'S
IDEA IS TO KEEP KIDS AWAY FROM
GANGS BEFORE THEY CAN BE
RECRUITED.
>> A BIG PERCENTAGE SAY THEY
MADE THE DECISION TO JOIN A
GANG, OR NOT TO JOIN, OR
PARTICIPATE IN VIOLENCE BETWEEN
FIFTH AND EIGHTH GRADE, SO I
SAID, WELL, THAT'S WHO I SHOULD
TARGET, BECAUSE IF THEY MAKE
THAT DECISION AT THAT TIME,
MAYBE I CAN GET A FEW OF THEM TO
SAY NO, I'M NOT GOING TO DO IT,
BECAUSE I'M INVOLVED IN
SOMETHING POSITIVE, I FEEL LIKE
I HAVE HOPE, AND I HAVE A
FUTURE.
>> Reporter: NEARLY ALL OF THE
KIDS HERE TOLD US THEY HAD HEARD
GUNSHOTS AND KNEW SOMEONE WHO
HAD BEEN SHOT.
WHAT MANY FEAR MOST IS BECOMING
THE UNINTENDED TARGETS OF
BULLETS MEANT FOR OTHERS.
>> BECAUSE I HAVE TO COME
OUTSIDE EVERY DAY, AND PEOPLE
JUST END UP KILLING INNOCENT
PEOPLE, LIKE MOSTLY EVERY DAY.
>> WHEN IT'S HOT OUTSIDE, PEOPLE
DO DUMB STUFF.
EVERYBODY BE OUTSIDE, IT GETS TO
ARGUMENTS, THEY HAVE GUNS AND
POINT THEM AT THE WRONG PERSON,
SHOOT FOR NO APPARENT REASON.
>> Reporter: THE DEADLY VIOLENCE
THAT AFFLICTS CHICAGO IS RARELY
VISIBLE IN THE GLEAMING DOWNTOWN
THAT TOURISTS SEE.
NEARLY ALL OF IT TAKES PLACE IN
THE IMPOVERISHED NEIGHBORHOODS
OF THE SOUTH AND WEST SIDES.
THE VICTIMS, OVERWHELMINGLY
BLACK AND LATINO.
FOR DIANE LATIKER, THE STRONGEST
ANTIDOTE TO THE KILLING IS
SHORING UP THE ECONOMY.
>> JOBS, INVESTMENT, ECONOMICS,
BUSINESS IS AFRAID TO COME HERE
BECAUSE OF CRIME, IT'S LIKE A
CATCH 22.
WE NEED THE INVESTMENT, AND THE
ECONOMICS TO SHOW UP, SO WE CAN
STOP HAVING THE GUNS SO READILY
AVAILABLE.
>> Reporter: BUT, FROM THE
POLICE POINT OF VIEW, POVERTY
ALONE DOES NOT LEAD PEOPLE TO
SHOOT EACH OTHER.
SUPERINTENDENT McCARTHY IS
CONVINCED THAT ONLY TOUGHER
PENALTIES ON GUN LAW VIOLATORS--
MUCH STIFFER PRISON TERMS-- WILL
MAKE A REAL IMPACT.
>> IT'S JUST SUCH A SIMPLE
FORMULA.
NEW YORK STATE DID IT.
STIFFENED THE GUN LAWS.
LIGHTEN UP ON THE NARCOTICS
PENALTIES.
AND YOU'LL SEE INCARCERATION
RATES GO DOWN, YOU'LL SEE GUN
SEIZURES GO DOWN, AND YOU'LL SEE
MURDERS GO DOWN AT THE SAME
TIME.
>> Reporter: FOR CHICAGO'S MAYOR
EMANUEL, THE FUNDAMENTAL
PROBLEM-- AND SOLUTION-- IS A
MATTER OF VALUES.
AT THE FUNERAL OF VONZELL BANKS,
HE STRUCK A STRIDENT TONE ON THE
ROLE OF FATHERS, IN PARTICULAR.
>> THERE'S A BIG DEBATE OUT
THERE ABOUT FATHERHOOD.
IT'S A FAIR DISCUSSION.
LET'S HAVE IT.
BECAUSE THE FATHERS HAVE TO BE
PRESENT.
THE FATHERS HAVE TO BE THERE AND
TEACH.
THESE ARE GOD'S CHILDREN.
THESE ARE YOUR CHILDREN.
THESE ARE MY CHILDREN.
>> Reporter: IN THE LIVELY
GOSPEL SERVICE, MIXED WITH NOTES
OF SORROW WERE SONGS OF JOY FOR
THE LIFE THAT THIS 17-YEAR-OLD
LIVED.
DEMONSTRATIONS OF FAITH THAT HIS
SPIRIT WAS NOW IN A BETTER
PLACE.
BUT THE SONGS AND PRAYERS COULD
NOT MASK THE DEEPER ANGUISH IN
THIS CONGREGATION AND IN THIS
CITY THAT FAR TOO MANY OF ITS
CHILDREN ARE TAKEN AWAY IN
SENSELESS ACTS OF VIOLENCE.
I'M CHRIS BURY FOR THE PBS
NEWSHOUR IN CHICAGO.
>> Woodruff: STILL AHEAD ON THE
NEWSHOUR: THE SEARCH FOR SIGNS
OF INTELLIGENT LIFE IN THE
UNIVERSE EXPANDS AND LEARNING TO
THINK ON ONE'S FEET, THROUGH
DANCE.
>> Ifill: NEXT: DELIVERING
CUTTING EDGE MEDICAL CARE FROM A
MOST UNUSUAL VEHICLE.
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT FRED DE
SAM LAZARO REPORTS FROM VIETNAM.
IT'S PART OF HIS ONGOING SERIES:
AGENTS FOR CHANGE.
>> Reporter: BACK IN 1970 WHEN
THIS WIDE BODY D.C.10 WENT INTO
SERVICE WAR WAS STILL RAGING ALL
AROUND THIS AIRPORT IN HUE,
VIETNAM.
THERE ARE STILL REMINDERS OF THE
CONFLICT THAT ENDED 40 YEARS
AGO, INCLUDING THE EXHIBIT THAT
CAPTURED AMERICAN MILITARY
HARDWARE.
BUT AT THE AIRPORT A VERY
DIFFERENT PERCEPTION.
>> HEY, HOW YOU DOING?
>> Reporter: THE D.C.10 CREW
GOT A FLOWERY WELCOME THEN
QUICKLY GOT TO WORK ON BOARD.
>> WE CONVERT THIS AIRPLANE INTO
A FULLY EQUIPPED EYE HOSPITAL,
STATE OF ART FACILITY.
WE HAVE A TEAM OF 22
PROFESSIONALS, COVERING ALL WHAT
IS NEEDED TO RUN THE HOSPITAL.
>> Reporter: DR. AHMED GOMAA IS
MEDICAL DIRECTOR OF THE ORBIS
FLYING EYE HOSPITAL.
STARTED IN 1982 WITH GRANTS FROM
THE U.S. GOVERNMENT AND
CORPORATE AND INDIVIDUAL DONORS
MOSTLY FROM THE AIRLINE
INDUSTRY, IT HAS VISITED 92
COUNTRIES.
THIS IS THE SIXTH VISIT TO
VIETNAM.
BESIDES THE PAID STAFF, THERE
ARE DOZENS OF VOLUNTEERS,
INCLUDING THE PILOTS.
NURSES AND DOCTORS DO HANDS ON
CARE DURING THE WEEK LONG VISIT
BUT THE MAIN GOAL IS TRAINING-TO
SUSTAIN CARE LONG AFTER THEY
LEAVE, SAYS CALIFORNIA BASED
SURGEON MARY O'HARA.
>> THIS IS VERY, VERY DIFFERENT
THAN BEING THE GREAT WHITE
SURGEON WHO COMES IN AND DOES
SOME MAGICAL SURGERIES AND THEN
LEAVES WITHOUT IMPARTING ANY OF
THE MAGIC TO THE SURGEONS IN THE
COMMUNITY.
IT'S TEACHING THE DOCTORS THE
SURGICAL SKILLS TO GO FORTH AND
DO GOOD THINGS FOR THE
COMMUNITY, AND ALSO TEACH OTHER
DOCTORS.
SO THERE'S A RIPPLE EFFECT.
>> Reporter: SO, WELL BEFORE THE
PLANE ARRIVES, ORBIS HAS ALERTED
LOCAL EYE CARE PROVIDERS WHO IN
TURN ALERT LIKELY PATIENTS.
FOR EIGHT-YEAR-OLD THUY, IT'S A
RARE CHANCE AT SURGERY FOR HER
STRABISMUS, OR LAZY EYE.
STRABISMUS, OR LAZY EYE. >> (
translated): WE TOOK HER
>> (translated): WE
TOOK HER TO SEE A DOCTOR FOUR
YEARS AGO.
TO SEE A DOCTOR FOUR YEARS AGO.
>> (translated): WE
WENT TO A
WENT TO A WE WERE AFRAID TO EVEN
ASK HOW
WE WERE AFRAID TO EVEN ASK HOW
MUCH IT WOULD COST.
>> Reporter: THUY'S FATHER IS
DISABLED.
HER MOTHER EARNS LESS THAN TWO
DOLLARS A DAY GATHERING AND
SELLING RECYCLABLES.
SELLING RECYCLABLES. >> (
translated): I HOPE THE
>> (translated): I HOPE
THE DOCTORS HELP ME BECAUSE I
DON'T
DOCTORS HELP ME BECAUSE I DON'T
WANT TO BE CROSS-EYED ANYMORE.
>> Reporter: STRABISMUS IS
COMMON, AFFECTING PERHAPS FOUR
PERCENT OF ALL PEOPLE.
PATIENTS CAN LOSE SIGHT IN THE
WAYWARD EYE AND DEPTH
PERCEPTION.
THERE ALSO ARE PAINFUL PSYCHO
SOCIAL EFFECTS, SAYS DR. O'HARA
>> WE'RE KEYED TO BE ATTRACTED
TO SYMMETRY AND REPULSED BY
ASYMMETRY ON A VERY SUBCONSCIOUS
LEVEL AND PEOPLE WHO HAVE
CROOKED EYES TEND TO BE DOWN-
RATED IN SOCIETY.
>> Reporter: JUST BECAUSE OF THE
APPEARANCE OF THAT PERSON.
>> RIGHT.
>> Reporter: SIX-YEAR-OLD VAN
DOESN'T SEEM AFFECTED BY SOCIAL
STIGMA, AT LEAST NOT YET.
STIGMA, AT LEAST NOT YET. >> (
translated): HER LIFE IS
>> (translated): HER
LIFE IS PRETTY NORMAL.
PRETTY NORMAL.
SHE GETS TEASED A BIT, BUT HER
LIFE IS PRETTY NORMAL.
>> Reporter: VAN'S PARENTS ALSO
STRUGGLE TO MAKE ENDS MEET AND
CANNOT AFFORD SURGERY.
CANNOT AFFORD SURGERY. >> (
translated): WE HAD BEEN
>> (translated): WE HAD
BEEN A TODOCTOR THREE YEARS AGO.
A TODOCTOR THREE YEARS AGO.
THEY SAID WAIT FOR A CHARITY
GROUP TO COME.
>> Reporter: THE NEXT DAY THEY
AND OTHERS GATHERED AT THE LOCAL
EYE HOSPITAL FOR SCREENING
ABOUT 75 PATIENTS ARE BEING
SCREENED HERE AT THE LOCAL
HOSPITAL.
SOME 45 WILL BE CHOSEN FOR
SURGERY OR LASER TREATMENT,
BASED ON A VARIETY OF CRITERIA.
THEY NEED TO BE PTICUARLARLY
GOOD TEACHABLE CASES.
YOUNG PATIENTS WITH GOOD
PROGNOSES HAVE PRIORITY, AS DO
THOSE IN DANGER OF LOSING THEIR
SIGHT ALTOGETHER.
ORBIS VOLUNTEERS-- SURROUNDED BY
LOCAL DOCTORS AND STUDENTS--
ASSESSED PATIENTS WITH VARIOUS
EYE DISEASES.
INCLUDING DIABETES-RELATED
CONDITIONS, GLAUCOMA AND
STRABISMUS
THUY, IT TURNS OUT, WASN'T A
GOOD TEACHABLE CASE AND NOT
REALLY READY FOR SURGERY.
DR. O'HARA SAYS SHE NEEDED MORE
"PATCHING" THERAPY, IN WHICH THE
GOOD EYE IS COVERED UP SO THE
WANDERING ONE CAN BE EXERCISED.
>> WE REALLY NEED TO HAVE HER IN
HER GLASSES AND HAVE HER
AMBLYOPIA TREATED TO THE MAXIMUM
THAT IT CAN BE TREATED AND THEN
THINK ABOUT SURGERY.
>> Reporter: THE LET DOWN WAS
PLAIN TO SEE ON THE FACES OF
THUY AND HER MOTHER.
THUY AND HER MOTHER. >> (
translated): OF COURSE
>> (translated): OF
COURSE WE'RE SAD, SEEING MY
DAUGHTER
WE'RE SAD, SEEING MY DAUGHTER
SAD.
WE WERE HOPEFUL WORKING WITH
THESE PEOPLE SO IT'S A LITTLE
SAD THAT NOTHING CAME OF IT.
>> AND IS SHE OTHERWISE HEALTHY?
>> Reporter: IT WAS VAN'S TURN
>> SEE HOW MUCH BIGGER THE
EXOTROPIA IS HERE THAN DOWN
HERE?
I WOULD DO 10MM BILATERAL
LATERAL RECTUS RECESSIONS.
>> Reporter: MEANING VAN WOULD
GET SURGERY ON BOTH EYES TO
BRING THEM INTO ALIGNMENT.
THE NEXT MORNING, AS SHE AND HER
FATHER WALKED UP TO THE
AIRPLANE, LECTURES WERE UNDERWAY
IN WHAT NORMALLY IS THE FIRST
CLASS SECTION.
IT'S NOW A 48 SEAT CLASSROOM.
IN THE BACK, THE TEAM LED BY DR.
O'HARA WAS PREPARING.
>> YOU READY?
DOES SHE HAVE ANY ALLERGIES?
>> (translated): NO!
>> Reporter: NO ALLERGIES AND
CLEARLY NO FEARS AS SHE
UNDERWENT A 90-MINUTE PROCEDURE-
FOLLOWING CLOSELY ON VIDEO
SCREEN IN THE CLASSROOM.
WHILE THERE ARE MORE ECONOMICAL
WAYS TO DO THIS.
EVEN FLYING TRAINEES TO
CALIFORNIA WOULD COST LESS THAN
BUT FOR ORBIS A KEY PART OF THE
MISSION IS PUBLICITY FOR THE
CAUSE.
WHICH IS OFTEN NEGLECTED AMID
MYRIAD CHALLENGES FACED IN
DEVELOPING NATIONS.
DR. GOMAA SAYS THE SHEER GEE
WHIZ FACTOR HELPS DRAW ATTENTION
TO EYE DISEASE,
>> THE YOUNG DOCTORS IN VIETNAM
ARE VERY GOOD.
THEY NEED SUPPORT.
THEY NEED MACHINES.
>> SLOW, GOOD, UP, BEAUTIFUL!
>> Reporter: LOCAL SURGEON THAO
PHUONG SAYS SHE ALSO LEARNED
ABOUT PROCESSES THAT HELP
DELIVER CARE EFFICIENTLY.
>> THE SURGERY WENT FINE.
THE PERSON I WAS TRAINING ON
THIS PARTICULAR SURGERY HAD DONE
SURGERY BEFORE AND SHE WAS VERY
GOOD AND ATTENTIVE LISTENING TO
INSTRUCTION AND FOLLOWING
INSTRUCTION.
>> DR. O'HARA WAS VERY CLEAR IN
HER INSTRUCTIONS.
THE WHOLE PROCESS, FROM TINY
THINGS, FROM ANESTHESIA, IT WAS
VERY DETAILED STEP-BY-STEP.
>> Reporter: SHE AND OTHER LOCAL
DOCTORS HOPE ORBIS-THROUGH
LOBBYING AND SOMETIMES SECURING
THEM EXPAND CARE-- ALLOWING
FAMILIES LIKE THUY'S TO AFFORD
CARE.
FOR ORBIS' PART, WHILE IT NEEDS
LOTS OF MONEY TO RUN ITS
OPERATION, IT GETS ALMOST AS
MUCH IN KIND-THROUGH VOLUNTEERS,
LIKE PILOT BOB RUTHERFORD
>> YOU SEE THINGS THAT YOU NEVER
SEE IN LIFE.
YOUNG CHILDREN WHO'VE NEVER HAD
VISION, THEY HAVE THEIR SIGHT
RESTORED.
THOSE THINGS REALLY KINDA PULL
AT YOUR HEARTSTRINGS, MAKES IT
EASY TO DO.
>> Reporter: THE MORNING THE
MORNING AFTER SURGERY, VAN WAS
STILL PUFFY AND A BIT GROGGY.
ORBIS SENT US THIS VIDEO TAKEN A
FEW DAYS LATER OF A CHILD WHO IN
DR. O'HARA'S WORDS, HAD
"SYMMETRY" RESTORED TO HER LIFE.
THIS IS FR DE EDSAM LAZARO FOR
THE PBS NEWSHOUR IN HUE, VIETNAM
>> Woodruff: FRED'S REPORTING IS
A PARTNERSHIP WITH THE UNDER-
TOLD STORIES PROJECT AT ST.
MARY'S UNIVERSITY OF MINNESOTA.
>> Ifill: THE SEARCH FOR SIGNS
OF INTELLIGENT LIFE IN THE
UNIVERSE MAY HAVE BEEN A
FRUITLESS ONE SO FAR, BUT THE
EFFORT GOT A MAJOR BOOST TODAY
WITH A NEW INITIATIVE FROM
SCIENTISTS STEPHEN HAWKING AND
OTHERS.
USING SOME OF THE WORLD'S
BIGGEST RADIO TELESCOPES, THE
ROJEPCT WILL SPEND THE NEXT TEN
YEARS SURVEYING ONE MILLION OF
THE CLOSEST STARS TO EARTH,
TRYING TO FIND ANY SIGNALS FROM
THE 100 CLOSEST GALAXIES.
IT'S CALLED THE "BREAKTHROUGH
INITIATIVE" AND IT'S FUNDED BY
RUSSIAN BILLIONAIRE AND SILICON
VALLEY TECH INVESTOR YURI
MILNER.
HE'S PLEDGED $100 MILLION FOR
THE PROJECT.
EARLIER TODAY IN LONDON,
PHYSICIST STEPHEN HAWKING SPOKE
TO REPORTERS ABOUT THE ETERNAL
QUEST.
>> IT'S TIME TO COMMIT TO
FINDING THE ANSWER TO SEARCH FOR
LIFE BEYOND EARTH.
THE GREAT INITIATIVES ARE MAKING
THAT COMMITMENT.
WE ARE ALIVE, WE ARE
INTELLIGENT, WE MUST KNOW.
>> Ifill: ANDREW SIEMION IS
DIRECTOR OF THE BERKELEY
S.E.T.I. RESEARCH CENTER AND IS
AFFILIATED WITH THE BREAKTHROUGH
INITIATIVE.
THE ACRONYM S.E.T.I. STANDS FOR
"SEARCH FOR EXTRATERRESTRIAL
INTELLIGENCE."
ANDREW SIEMION, THANK YOU FOR
JOINING US.
ASIDE FROM HOLLYWOOD MOVIES, HOW
HARD HAVE WE BEEN LOOKING FOR
EXTRATERRESTRIAL LIFE IN THE
UNIVERSE?
>> WE HAVE BEEN LOOKING PRETTY
HARD.
THE MODERN RADIO SEARCH FOR
EXTRATERRESTRIAL INTELLIGENCE,
THIS IS THE EXPERIMENT TO TRY TO
DETECT EXTRATERRESTRIAL
TECHNOLOGIES BY RADIO EMISSIONS
HAS BEEN GOING ON FOR ABOUT 55
YEARS.
>> Ifill: THIS $100 MILLION
INVESTMENT THAT'S BEING MADE,
HOW SIGNIFICANT IS THAT AND WHAT
WILL IT DO?
>> IT'S ABSOLUTELY INCREDIBLE,
AND IT'S COMING AT A VERY
FORTUITOUS TIME.
IN THE LAST COUPLE OF YEARS,
WE'VE LEARNED AT LEAST 10% OF
THE STARS IN OUR GALAXY HAVE AN
EARTH' LIKE PLANET, ABOUT THE
SIZE OF THE EARTH THAT LIQUID
WATER COULD EXIST ON THE
SURFACE.
AT THE SAME TIME, OUR COMPUTER
TECHNOLOGY HAS ADVANCED
DRAMATICALLY.
SO WE HAVE THE OPPORTUNITY NOW
TO PAIR OUR KNOWLEDGE OF
EXTRA-SOLAR PLANETS AND
POSSIBILITIES FOR LIFE IN THE
UNIVERSE WITH INCREDIBLE
ADVANCES AND COMPUTING
TECHNOLOGY TO CONDUCT THE MOST
SENSITIVE SEARCH FOR
EXTRATERRESTRIAL INTELLIGENCE
EVER UNDERTAKENAN THE H HISTORY
OF HUMANITY.
>> Ifill: ARE WE TALKING
BIGGER TELL SCOPES, HIGHER
FREQUENCY RADIOS SIGNALS?
>> WE DON'T KNOW EXACTLY WHAT
FREQUENCY EXTRATERRESTRIAL
INTELLIGENCE MAY BE SCANNING ON.
SO WE NEED TO SCAN MUCH TO HAVE
THE ELECTROMAGNETIC AND RADIO
SPECTRUM AS WE CAN, AND THAT'S
WHAT THE COMPUTER TECHNOLOGY
GETS US.
IT GETS US THE ABILITY TO SEARCH
A HUGE ABILITY AMOUNT OF RADIO
SPECTRUM, 20 TO 50 TIMES MORE
THAN WE'VE EVER BEEN ABLE TO
LOOK AT BEFORE, AND WE'RE
HOOKING THE INSTRUMENTS WE'RE
BUILDING UP TO-AT-LARGEST RADIO
TELL SCOPES IN THE WORLD TO
CONDUCT A VERY SENSITIVE SEARCH.
>> Ifill: THE PUBLIC CAN BE
INVOLVED IN THIS SEARCH?
>> THAT'S ABSOLUTELY RIGHT.
THERE'S A BRORKSD OPEN
PHILOSOPHY TO THE ENTRY PROJECT.
ALL THE DATA WILL BE OPEN, ALL
THE SOFTWARE WE USE, HARDWARE,
EVERYTHING WILL BE OPEN SOURCE.
A COMPONENT OF THAT IS A PAIRING
WITH THE STUDY AT HOME PROJECT.
THIS IS A SCREEN SAVER SOME OF
YOUR AUDIENCE MAY HAVE HEARD OF
THAT THEY CAN DOWNLOAD ON THEIR
COMPUTER AND RUN IT AND ACTUALLY
ANALYZE SOME OF THE DATA FROM
THE TELL SCOPES WE COLLECT ON
THEIR HOME COMPUTER AND
CONTRIBUTE TO THE SEARCH.
>> Ifill: SO THERE ARE TWO
PIECES OF THIS, ONE IS WHAT WE
WANT THE UNIVERSE TO KNOW ABOUT
US AND WHAT WE WANT TO LEARN
ABOUT THE UNIVERSE.
SO WHO GETS TO DECIDE HOW MUCH
WE WANT THEM TO KNOW ABOUT US?
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
WELL, THAT'S THE BEAUTIFUL THING
ABOUT THIS PROJECT IS THAT WE
ALL GET TO DECIDE.
TWO BREAKTHROUGH INITIATIVES
WERE ANNOUNCED TODAY.
ONE IS LISTEN.
THAT'S THE SEARCH FOR
EXTRATERRESTRIAL INITIATIVE WE
JUST TALKED ABOUT.
THE OTHER IS CALLED MESSAGE.
THIS IS A PROJECT THAT'S GOING
TO TRY TO UNITE THE WORLD IN
CONSIDERING WHAT WE MIGHT WANT
TO SAY TO AN ADVANCED
CIVILIZATION THAT WE MIGHT SOME
DAY GET IN CONTACT WITH.
IT'S IMPORTANT TO POINT OUT
THERE'S NO COMMITMENT TO SEND
THE MESSAGE, BUT THIS IS JUST A
PROJECT TO TRY TO DETERMINE WHAT
TYPE OF MESSAGE WE MIGHT SEND.
WOULD IT BE ART, MUSIC, WOULD IT
BE PICTURES?
WOULD IT BE SOUND?
AND THE WHOLE WORLD WILL
PARTICIPATE IN THAT ENTERRIFY TO
THINK OF THIS MESSAGE.
>> Ifill: WHAT IF WE DISCOVER
LIFE OUT THERE THAT IS NOT
FRIENDLY AND, THEREFORE, THERE
IS ONLY SO MUCH WE WANT THEM TO
KNOW ABOUT US?
WHO CONTROLS THAT?
>> THAT'S A VERY GOOD QUESTION.
AS I SAID THERE'S NO COMMITMENT
TO SEND A RESPONSE.
I PERSONALLY THINK THAT IF WE DO
DETECT ADVANCED LIFE, WE SHOULD
UNDERTAKE A BROAD DISCUSSION
WITH ALL SEGMENTS OF HUMANITY --
SOCIAL, POLITICAL, GOVERNMENTS,
ECONOMIC -- AND CONSIDER WHETHER
WE DO WANT TO TRY TO COMMUNICATE
WITH THE LIFE WE ENCOUNTER.
>> Ifill: VERY FASCINATING.
A LOT OF QUESTIONS TO BE
ANSWERED AS WELL AS ASKED HERE.
ANDREW SIEMION WITH U.C.
BERKELEY "SETI" PROJECT.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: FOR NEARLY 40
YEARS, THE NATIONAL DANCE
INSTITUTE IN NEW YORK HAS GIVEN
FREE LESSONS TO NEW YORK PUBLIC
SCHOOL STUDENTS.
AND AS JEFFREY BROWN FOUND OUT,
THESE KIDS ARE LEARNING SOME
INCREDIBLE STEPS, TAKE A LOOK.
>> Brown: FIFTH GRADERS AT
PUBLIC SCHOOL 2 IN NEW YORK'S
CHINATOWN LEARNING TO THINK ON
THEIR FEET.
THEY'RE AMONG 6,000 NEW YORK
CITY SCHOOL CHILDREN WHO RECEIVE
DANCE INSTRUCTION EACH WEEK
AT NO COST.
BUT, ACCORDING TO THEIR TEACHER,
AT GREAT BENEFIT.
>> THEY FIND A DIFFERENT FORM TO
EXPRESS THEMSELVES, THEY FIND
THEIR SELF-CONFIDENCE, AND YOU
REALLY SEE THEM BECOMING THEIR
OWN PERSON.
>> Brown: IT'S THE WORK OF THE
NATIONAL DANCE INSTITUTE, A
NONPROFIT THAT'S BEEN SENDING
INSTRUCTIONAL TEAMS INTO NEW
YORK CITY SCHOOLS FOR NEARLY 40
YEARS.
FILLING A GAP WHERE SCHOOL
BUDGETS FALL SHORT, FILLING A
NEED, SAYS SHUEN LIN, WHERE
EDUCATIONAL PRIORITIES ARE
ELSEWHERE.
>> MOST OF THE KIDS IN OUR
SCHOOL, AND IN ANY SCHOOL RIGHT
NOW, WE'RE SFOCUO SED ON HIGH-
STAKES TESTING.
AND KIDS DO NOTHING BUT BASIC
READING, MATH, READI MATNGH.
THEY SIT SO MUCH IN THE SCHOOL
IN MY CLASSROOM AND THIS
PROVIDES AN OPPORTUNITY FOR THEM
TO NOT REALLY JUST GET AWAY FROM
LEARNING, BECAUSE THEY'RE STILL
LEARNING.
>> Brown: ELLEN WEINSTEIN IS
N.D.I.'S CREATIVE DIRECTOR AND A
LONGTIME INSTRUCTOR.
>> THE CHILDREN LEARN GRIT AND
TENACITY AND TO TAKE CHAES,NC
AND TO LEARN THAT IT'S OKAY TO
MAKE A MISTAKE, BECAUSE IF THEY
WORK HARD AND THEY COMMIT TO
SOMETHING, THEY'RE GOING TO BE
SUCCESSFUL.
>> Brown: ASSISTANT PRINCIPAL
JOANNA COHEN:
>> 96% OF OUR KIDS QUALIFY FOR
FREE OR REDUCED PRICE LUNCH.
AND MANY OF OUR STUDENTS ARE
VERY RECENT IMMIGRANTS TO THE
UNITED STATES.
ALL I CAN SAY IS THERE'S NOT
ENOUGH OF IT, SCHOOLS
DESPERATELY, CHILDREN
DESPERATELY NEED MORE.
>> I ALWAYS THOUGHT I WOULD BE
EITHER A DOCTOR, OR AN
ARCHAEOLOGIST OR A CROOK.
A REALLY GOOD CROOK.
>> Brown: THE FORCE BEHIND ALL
THIS IS A LEGEND IN THE WORLD OF
DANCE-- JACQUES D'AMBOISE-- WHO
CALLS HIMSELF "THE NEW YORKER
WITH THE FANCY FRENCH NAME."
IN FACT, D'AMBOISE GREW UP IN
HARD CIRCUMSTANCES IN 1930S AND
'40S NEW YORK.
HIS MOTHER STARTED HIM IN BALLET
AT SEVEN AS A WAY TO KEEP HIM
OUT OF TROUBLE.
HE LEFT SCHOOL AT 15 TO PURSUE
DANCE FULL-TIME.
AND AT JUST AGE 17, BECAME A
PRINCIPAL DANCER IN THE NEW YORK
CITY BALLET.
>> IF YOU THINK BACK, WHY ARE
YOU DOING WHAT YOU'RE DOING.
IT'S THOSE EARLY TEACHERS, THOSE
EARLY INFLUENCES.
YOUR TEACHERS, ESPECIALLY, AND
YOUR PARENTS, THAT KIND OF WRITE
THE SCRIPTS THAT YOU END UP
ACTING OUT THE REST OF YOUR
LIFE.
>> Brown: D'AMBOISE WOULD DANCE
ON STAGES AROUND THE WORLD FOR
DECADES.
AND IN 1976, EVEN WHILE STILL
WITH THE NEW YORK CITY BALLET,
HE BEGAN GOING INTO PUBLIC
SCHOOLS TO OFFER FREE LESSONS TO
STUDENTS.
>> I KNOW HOW IT TRANSFORMED ME.
AND I NEVER PAID A NICKEL OR A
DIME FOR A LESSON, I HAD FREE
ALL THE TIME.
>> Brown: THE INSTITUTE GREW
INTO A CITY-WIDE FORCE, WITH A
HEADQUARTERS IN HARLEM.
THERE, EVERYATUR SDAY, CHILDREN
SELECTED BY THEIR INSTRUCTORS AT
N.D.I COME FOR ADDITIONAL,
HIGHER-LEVEL TRAINING-- ALSO
FE-- RE IN PREPARATION FOR A
YEAR-END PERFORMANCE.
D'AMBOISE STILL COMES DOWN TO
WATCH AND OFFER A FEW POINTERS.
>> IT'S THE BEST THEATER.
IT'S BETTER THAN BROADWAY TO
WATCH THESE FABULOUS NEW YORK
CITY CHILDREN DANCING AND
IT SETS MY SATURDAYS OFF LIKE
HAVING A BIRTHDAY PARTY.
>> Brown: THE ORGANIZATION'S
BEEN AROUND LONG ENOUGH THAT
FORMER STUDENTS, LIKE DUFFTIN
GARCIA, HAVE THEMSELVES BECOME
INSTRUCTORS.
GARCIA WAS JUST EIGHT WHEN HE
WAS SELECTED TO JOIN N.D.I.'S
SATURDAY PROGRAM.
HE SAYS HIS SCHOOLMATES DIDN'T
MAKE IT EASY AT FIRST.
>> THEY TOTALLY MADE FUN OF ME
AND THEY CALLED ME TWINKLE TOES,
AND THEY CALLED ME, THEY HAD THE
NICKNAMES AND SO FORTH.
AND OF COURSE I QUIT BECAUSE I
COULDN'T HANDLE THE PRESSURE, I
THOUGHT IT JUST WASN'T FOR ME,
AND I WENT INTO MARTIAL ARTS
THINKING MAYBE I CAN GET MY
MANHOOD BACK THAT WAY.
>> Brown: DISTANT MEMORIES NOW.
GARCIA FOUND HIS WAY BACK TO
DANCE AND USES LAUGHTER AND HIS
OWN EXPERIENCE TO PUT CHILDREN
AT EASE.
>> YOU MAKE IT SO THAT THE ONES
WHO DON'T FEEL LIKE THEY'RE
COOL, YOU MAKE IT COOL.
THE ONES WHO DON'T FEEL LIKE
THEY'RE MAYBE COMFORTABLE, YOU
MAKE THEM COMFORTABLE.
THOSE THAT YOU FEEL LIKE MAYBE
IT'S JUST NOT FOR THEM, YOU MAKE
IT SEEM, YOU MAKE IT SO THAT
THEY UNDERSTAND THAT IT'S FOR
EVERYONE.
>> Brown: 11-YEAR-OLD JONATHAN
ROSARIO HAD CLEARLY DECIDED
DANCING IS FOR HIM.
>> Brown: I WAS WATCHING AND
YOUR TEACHER WAS SAYING
"ATTITUDE, ATTITUDE", RIGHT?
WHAT DOES THAT MEAN TO YOU,
ATTITUDE?
>> LIKE PUT MORE OF YOUR SPICE
IN IT.
>> Brown: YOUR OWN WHAT, SPICE?
WHAT DOES THAT MEAN?
>> LIKE YOUR OWN MOVEMENT,
MAYBE.
LIKE WHEN YOU WALK, YOU GO...
>> Brown: JONATHAN'S MOTHER,
JESSICA CANDELARIO, DANCED IN
SCHOOL, AND SAYS HER SON HAS
GAINED FRIENDS AND CONFIDENCE
FROM THE PROGRAM.
>> HE TALKS ABOUT GOING TO
COLLEGE, AND MOMMY I WANT TO DO
THIS DANCING, I WANT TO GO FOR
THIS.
I'M LIKE, DO IT.
>> CHILDREN WILL PLAY 'TIL THEY
DROP, RIGHT?
ASK THEM TO PUT OUT THE GARBAGE,
"I'M TOO TIRED, MOMMY.
I'M TOO TIRED."
BUT IF YOU SAY, "CAN YOU PUT OUT
THE GARBAGE WALKING BACKWARDS?
AND THEN HOP ON ONE LEG, OR
SINGING THE STAR SPANGLED
BANNER," MAKE PLAY AND TESTING,
RIGHT.
PART OF THE GAME AND PEOPLE WILL
KILL THEMSELVES TO BE ABLE TO DO
IT.
>> Brown: A GLIMMER IN HIS EYE,
A LIGHTNESS TO HIS STEP,
D'AMBOISE TOLD US HOW DANCE
ALMOST KILLED HIM-- NEARLY EVERY
BODILY PART BROKEN OR REPLACED
AT ONE TIME OR ANOTHER.
SO WHAT KEEPS YOU GOING NOW AT
NEARLY 81?
>> WELL, BREATHING AND A
HEARTBEAT.
HOPEFULLY.
>> Brown: FROM HARLEM, NEW YORK,
I'M JEFFREY BROWN FOR THE PBS
NEWSHOUR.
>> Woodruff: ON THE NEWSHOUR
ONLINE TONIGHT: WE CONTINUE OUR
SERIES FROM CARTOONIST JACK
OHMAN, WHO ILLUSTRATES THE
POIGNANT AND HEARTWRENCHING
STORY OF THE FINAL DAYS OF HIS
FATHER'S LIFE.
FIND HIS LATEST, ON OUR HOME
PAGE.
THAT'S AT pbs.org/newshour.
>> Ifill: TONIGHT ON MOST OF
THESE PBS STATIONS: JOIN CHARLIE
ROSE AS HE GETS THE VIEW FROM
ISRAEL, ON THE IRAN NUCLEAR
DEAL.
>> Woodruff: AS WE CLOSE TONIGHT
FROM OUR NEW HOME AT THE
NWESHOUR, WE WANT TO TAKE NOTE
OF ALL OF THE HARD WORK THAT
WENT INTO GETTING THIS DESIGNED,
BUILT AND READY FOR YOU TO SEE
AND HEAR TONIGHT.
>> Ifill: IF YOU CAN IMAGINE,
THIS TOOK ONLY A WEEK OR TWO TO
GET DONE, TO MOVE TO ONE
STUDIO -- FROM ONE STUDIO TO
ANOTHER AND NOW WE HAVE OUR
BEAUTIFUL, NEW PLACE.
WE WANT TO THANK EVERYONE
INVOLVED, THE DESIGN TEAM AND
EVERYBODY LEER AT THE HOME
STATION IN WASHINGTON WETA.
THEY PUT A LOT INTO IT.
>> Woodruff: WE LIKE WHAT
WE'RE IN THE MIDDLE OF RIGHT
NOWER.
>> Ifill: WE'RE VERY HAPPY.
T FOR JOINING US.
AND THAT'S THE NEWSHOUR FOR
TONIGHT.
ON TUESDAY: WE MEET SOME
AMERICANS WHO HAVE TRAVELED TO
IRAQ, ON THEIR OWN, TO FIGHT
JOIN THE FIGHT AGAINST ISIS.
I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Woodruff: AND I'M JUDY
WOODRUFF.
JOIN US ONLINE AND AGAIN HERE
TOMORROW EVENING.
F ALL OORF US AT THE PBS
NEWSHOUR, THANK YOU AND GOOD
NIGHT.